From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> In his latest public health crusade,
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. is asking why
millions of Americans
>> [music]
>> have been taking psychiatric drugs for
far longer than ever intended.
>> I have been on Zoloft since I was 8
years old.
>> I've continuously been on
antidepressants
>> [music]
>> 27 years.
>> I've been on Luvox 30 years.
>> I've been on them longer than I've not
been on them.
>> In the process, [music]
he's highlighting an open secret in
medicine.
That doctors are much better at starting
drug treatments than at stopping [music]
them.
>> I was told to take it daily and I never
questioned that. I don't really think I
even asked or thought about how long I
would be on it.
>> I did not know that I was going to be on
them for the rest of my life. [music]
>> And that patients who want to end their
treatment are increasingly
>> [music]
>> taking matters into their own hands.
>> All of a sudden, I felt so strongly that
my brain was like, "You need to get off
[music] this medication."
>> Today,
Ellen Barry takes us inside the growing
movement
to de-prescribe.
It's Monday, June 22nd. [music]
Ellen, nice to have you on the show.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> Let me just start by asking how you came
to this topic of de-prescribing and for
the uninitiated, can you just define
that phrase?
>> De-prescribing is the art and science of
carefully tapering off a psychiatric
medication or reducing a psychiatric
medication.
I first heard the term really from
patient groups. There has long been a
sort of a subculture of people who talk
to each other on the internet about
being harmed by medication or feeling
that their medication isn't working
anymore, who sort of compare notes on
how to get off them.
And those communities, that's nothing
new. They've been out there for decades,
really since the early days of social
media.
But what's new is that this group,
largely of patients, now has a seat at
the table as federal health policy is
developed. And that's because of RFK Jr.
>> I want to thank President Trump for
entrusting me to deliver on his promise
to make America healthy again.
>> Dr. Kennedy made it clear during his
confirmation hearings that one of the
things he was looking at would be
curbing the use of [music] psychiatric
medications in the US.
>> 15% of American youth are now on
Adderall or some other ADHD medication.
>> He talked specifically about
antidepressants in those hearings, that
these medications were sort of
dependence-forming, that we prescribe
them too freely.
>> Even higher percentages are on SSRIs and
benzos. We are not just over-medicating
our children, we're over-medicating our
entire population.
>> And what he was talking about was the
most widely used category of psychiatric
medications, SSRIs.
>> Listen, I know people, including members
of my family,
who've had a much worse time getting off
of SSRIs than people have getting off
heroin.
>> He said that SSRI antidepressants
[music] are harder to quit than heroin.
>> Huh. Is that true?
>> No, there's no evidence supporting
[music] that.
SSRIs are used by probably around 35
million American adults.
These are selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors like Prozac or Zoloft or
Lexapro.
They're considered so safe to prescribe
that overwhelmingly they're prescribed
by family doctors or GPs rather than
psychiatrists.
>> Mhm.
>> And they're used for sort of an ever
expanding array of different problems,
not just for depression, but also for
all kinds of anxiety disorders,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, social
anxiety, PTSD, and that list, you know,
has just continued to get longer.
>> Right. And here he is assailing and
questioning the most widely used
medication in basically all of mental
health.
>> Right. So, after the confirmation
hearings at the beginning of 2025, I
think we were all watching closely to
see what was he actually planning to do.
And at the beginning of May, Secretary
Kennedy appeared at a summit on over
medicalization that was held by the Maha
Institute and InnerCompass Initiative,
which is a support organization for
people going off mental health
medications.
The thesis of the entire day was overuse
of SSRIs. And at the end of that day, he
announced a set of regulatory changes
that all kind of aimed to encourage
clinicians to help patients get off
SSRIs.
>> Hm. So, he's beginning to articulate a
kind of federal regulatory vision for
deperscription. What specifically is he
proposing?
>> He sent a dear colleague letter, which
is direct communication to hospitals and
doctors.
And the dear colleague letter
essentially said, don't default to using
medication for depression and anxiety,
look at other modes of treatment. And we
know that lots of things are effective
treatments for depression and anxiety.
Psychotherapy is probably the number one
alternate mode, but also sleep and
exercise and diet and lots of other
things.
>> Mhm.
>> So, that is sort of common sense advice.
It wasn't controversial.
>> And just to be clear, he's not a doctor,
RFK Jr., but he's basically writing a
letter to colleagues in the world of
public health and the medical community.
>> Correct. And then he introduced a
billing code that would allow Medicare
and Medicaid providers to be reimbursed
for helping patients get off
medications.
>> And why is that important?
>> It's important because it can be
complicated and time-consuming to help
people quit a psychiatric medication,
especially if they've been taking it for
a long time or they're taking a
complicated cocktail of four or five
psychiatric medications. It takes a lot
of time, and usually psychiatrists are
reimbursed for 15-minute med checks
every month. That's just not enough
time.
>> So, he's financially attempting to
incentivize doctors to participate in
deep prescribing.
>> Yes. And another thing he set in motion
is what's called a technical expert
panel to develop guidelines for tapering
off SSRIs. And this panel would create a
new set of recommendations for health
care providers on how best to do this.
>> And what's the reaction to these
proposals, to this speech from the
Secretary of Health and Human Services
from the world of medical experts out
there?
>> Yeah, I was really curious about that
because it was noticeable that there
were no medical organizations involved
in putting together this sort of day of
policy-making around the use of SSRIs.
And when I reached out to them, I think
there was a degree of alarm that they
had somehow been excluded from this
process, which sort of drives it. You
know, one of the central functions of
psychiatry. And I I had an opportunity
to find out a little bit more about that
because the American Psychiatric
Association held its annual meeting 10
days later.
>> That is extremely convenient
journalistically. I'm going to assume
you went. What did you find?
>> What was kind of two-fold. Some people
that I talked to were worried that this
was just the first step in a much more
ambitious plan on the side of Secretary
Kennedy that would lead to a bigger
discrediting of psychiatric treatments.
>> So their fear is that whatever this is,
it's just the beginning, maybe a side
door into greater government, what
perhaps restrictions on these drugs?
>> So a lot of doctors who I interviewed in
the hallways outside sessions at the APA
said that SSRIs are the foundation of
their practice, that they are so safe
that they've been using them for so many
years and that they turn people's lives
around, they make the difference between
being able to get up in the morning and
get dressed and get to work and not
being able to do those things. So a lot
of them were kind of passionate about
saying what they have seen with
patients. And I think the worry is that
people are going to be driven away from
taking medications or that somehow their
access will be restricted.
>> How many doctors at this conference were
open to or even in agreement with what
RFK Jr. is talking about here when it
comes to de-prescription?
>> Yes, so there was a second big takeaway
that I had from this gathering, which is
that a substantial number of doctors
there
agreed that this is an area where we
could do a lot better.
That is, training of psychiatrists
focuses a great deal on putting people
on medications, but much less on what it
means to take them off and what a
challenge it can be. And a number of
people I interviewed expressed
frustration over that.
In one of the panels that I attended, a
Dr. Ronald Winchell from Columbia
University School of Medicine
said that when he looked back at his
long career
one of the things that he most regretted
is
not taking patients off medications
until
later than he should have.
>> Mhm.
>> That is, hesitating for various reasons,
even when he thought that the medication
was no longer needed or no longer
effective.
>> It sounds like the second group of
doctors you're talking to feel like RFK
Jr. has identified a problem in their
world that everyone should be more
focused on.
>> Yeah, I think there was a lot of
discussion of de-prescribing at this
conference. There was a number of panels
on de-prescribing different classes of
medications. There was a new
de-prescribing handbook and it was
selling
a lot downstairs in the exhibition hall.
And in conversations with doctors, a
number of them acknowledged that this is
an area where we could do a lot better
at supporting patients.
>> One thing we haven't talked about here
is objective research that would
clarify the questions
we're discussing. If only the assumption
now is that doctors aren't talking
enough about getting off these drugs,
that's certainly the case RFK Jr.'s
making, some doctors are making it, too.
The implication is that people are on
these drugs for too long. So, what does
the research tell us about long-term use
of SSRIs?
>> The reality is that there isn't all that
much research on that.
>> Huh.
>> Most of the clinical trials we have on
these drugs are efficacy trials, and
they're shorter term, like 6 to 8-week
trials that are necessary for FDA
approval.
There's some longer-term work, but
very little that tells us what happens
after 3 years or 5 years or 10 years.
And I think when SSRIs were first
introduced in the 1980s,
it wasn't anticipated that people would
be taking them for years and years.
The clinical guidelines say, "Once
someone's symptoms are in remission,
that you should discontinue the
medication after 6, 9, 12 months, and
just go back off." But I think we see in
reality that for a lot of people, that's
just not happening. So, one study found
that the median duration of treatment
with an SSRI is 5 years, and for many,
it's a lot longer than that.
>> That amazes me, to be honest, that we
don't have much of any long-term
research on what has become for so many
people long-term treatments. I mean, if
millions and millions of people are
taking these
prescription drugs for years and years
and years, it's deeply surprising that
we don't know clinically what the impact
of that is.
>> Right. That kind of research just hasn't
been a priority.
>> So, in the weeks since RFK Jr.
introduced these ideas,
and once the medical health world began
to absorb them, what has actually
happened to these proposals?
>> Well, the incoming president of the APA
is going to have a seat on one of the
technical expert panels that will be
developing guidelines in this area.
There's also a psychiatrist from the
American Society of Clinical
Psychopharmacology. So, there are going
to be representatives of sort of major
professional groups at the table.
>> Got it. So,
a lot of these medical experts decided
that even if they were skeptical of RFK
Jr.'s agenda here,
that they wanted to be a part of it. If
you can't beat them, join them, shape
them.
>> They wanted a seat at the table.
>> [music]
>> I mean, as this de-prescribing project
gets off the ground, it's involving both
establishment mainstream psychiatry and
across the table representatives of a
totally different group that has been
watching psychiatry critically from the
outside
for a long time.
>> [music]
>> And that includes patients who are
saying, "How long are we supposed to be
on these things?
And why haven't we been having these
conversations with our doctors the whole
time?"
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Ellen, I want to turn to this world of
patients who have been eager for this
de-prescription conversation to reach
the point that it now has, where the
federal government is broaching it and
medical experts are now joining the
conversation. And in particular, I want
to better understand the specific
reasons that patients are giving for
wanting to get off these medications and
the specific experiences
that lead them to that decision.
>> Well, you know, whenever I write about
this subject, we really get inundated
with personal stories.
>> [music]
>> And people have different reasons for
wanting to get off a medication.
>> I thought like if I get off the
antidepressants, I can see what life is
without this numbness.
>> Sometimes they feel like their emotions
have been kind of muffled.
>> I wasn't having these anxious thoughts,
but I also wasn't experiencing like as
much high good emotions, either.
>> There was like delayed sexual side
effects.
>> Sometimes they have side effects.
Sometimes they feel that the medication
just isn't working anymore.
>> Maybe it's the classic thing. Oh, I feel
great. I must not need my medication
anymore.
>> By then, I had been on the medication
for about 25 years.
>> [music]
>> And I was just curious, what would my
life be like without this?
>> And I've heard from a lot of people who
said, [music] you know, I started taking
this medication when I was a teenager
and
maybe that's what I needed to get
through that period, but now many years
have passed and I've entered adulthood
not exactly knowing who I was.
>> Right, who you would be without those
drugs.
>> [music]
>> Exactly.
>> It's FOMO. It's like, what am I missing
out on? I want to live in real life. I
don't want to live in black and white. I
want to live in color, you know.
>> Like those intense emotions that can
feel so uncomfortable, especially when
you're a very young person, they're also
part of your personality. And I hear
from people who say like, I want to know
who that person is.
>> Once these people you're hearing from
decide that they're going to try to stop
taking these medications, how have they
actually technically been doing that?
And who is guiding them through that
process?
>> I mean, I think some people work with
their doctors in getting off or tapering
a medication, and some people don't.
>> I went in and they were like, "Hey, you
want a refill of your Zoloft?" And I was
like, "Yes, I guess, if I still need to
be on it." And they were like, "Cool."
>> A lot of the people we hear from [music]
say this conversation about how to get
off isn't happening with their doctor,
or if it is happening, it isn't
satisfying. Or for others, they just
don't see their doctor often enough to
get the kind of robust [music] support
that they need.
>> Not to say all doctors, but I don't know
if how many doctors really
grasp what it is beyond an
antidepressant. Like, if
you go in there and you're feeling
depressed, they say, "All right, then
you just raise the medication."
Some are better than others, but
I never really
go to them to get off of it. I did that
myself.
>> And in some cases, people just lose
trust in their doctor if they think that
the medication that they've been
prescribed is making them worse.
>> I'll be honest, I at this point, because
I have been dismissed about everything
else, I was like, I don't trust these
people. I can [music] make my own health
decisions.
>> And those people have been talking to
each other now for years and years with
a lot of frustration towards organized
medicine. [music]
>> And for those folks who have been trying
to do this essentially DIY,
what has been their playbook, for lack
of a better word? What does it look
like?
>> I use Dr. Google, and I look at forums
on Reddit and stuff like that, and
people are like, um if you do cold
turkey, it can really destabilize you a
little bit.
>> So, the kind of subculture around
tapering and withdrawing from
medications has been out there since the
early days of social media.
One example is a site called Surviving
Antidepressants.
And what you would find there is people
exchanging their withdrawal protocols
and it got incredibly technical.
People would be talking about reducing
their dosage by a single bead within the
capsule or liquefying it or using
pharmaceutical scales.
And over time, you know, that network
has sort of matured into a real
marketplace of support.
>> And that's presumably to avoid the side
effects of abruptly taking yourself off
of one of these drugs. But even when
people are very careful and very
gradual, what are the side effects of
ending these treatments?
>> The side effects that you most often
hear about are vertigo, nausea, or
flu-like symptoms.
>> [music]
>> I completely stopped sleeping.
>> Insomnia.
Something that they call brain zaps.
>> Electricity in my head.
>> Which are like a twinge or a sense of a
feeling of a sort of a shock-like
sensation in the brain.
>> Wow. It's like this
kind of thing. [music]
>> And there's some portion of people who
describe
the process of withdrawal as really
intolerable.
>> Mhm.
>> Like jumping out of their skin and it
[music] is its own kind of debilitating
crisis.
>> I would like watch a movie and cry. I'd
watch commercial and cry.
Read a book and I'd cry.
I was listening to the Beach Boys Pet
Sounds album and just [music] tears
coming down my eyes. It felt good for a
while, but then it was like it was like
going like having emotions that were
like a
dripping faucet to like a fire hose.
It's too much.
>> But what doctors generally say is that
for most people these symptoms really
only last for a few weeks.
And then if after that, you're feeling
dramatic mood changes, you might be
experiencing relapse.
>> Essentially, the conditions that may
have prompted you to first go on these
drugs.
>> Yes.
>> However severe these side effects are,
they would seem to buttress the argument
that the best version of de-prescription
is a medically supervised one, where
you're not trying to do it yourself, and
you're not determining dosages and
tapering, and where the same doctor who
prescribed the drug is the one helping
you get off of them, and aware that
you're trying to do it, and helping you
manage what could be a brain zap or a
resumption of symptoms. It feels like
something that should not be DIY.
>> That's certainly the view from within
medicine, that one of the reasons that
you need supervision if you're doing
something like this is just to guard
against the possibility of a relapse.
>> And this would seem to make the case for
the conversation that RFK is pushing the
medical world to have.
>> Right. I think there is some
acknowledgement that prescribers aren't
putting the same amount of care and
attention into landing the plane as
taking off.
>> Well, and here I want to acknowledge
that the conversation that RFK is trying
to have, and that we're having here, is
not
theoretical for me, anyway. And here I'm
going to shake my Lexapro.
I've been on Lexapro as an anti-anxiety
medication for at least a decade. It was
prescribed by a psychiatrist, but then
just became part of my relationship with
my general practitioner. I just kind of
get it renewed. And I've not really been
asked to think about how long I should
be on it.
And now suddenly having this
conversation with you is making me ask
that question. How long am I supposed to
be on it? What would happen if I stopped
taking it? Would all the white noise of
anxiety that made me want to go on
Lexapro, would that return? Or 10 years
later, have I outgrown that and I just
don't know it because I've never tried
to taper myself off this to find out who
I would be if I weren't me on Lexapro. I
mean, it's not a simple question.
>> I hear so many people asking that kind
of question. Like, is there some
authentic self that I want to go back
to? You know, what would life look like
if I took this medication away? I just
think that question is percolating. And
I feel like what's a little bit more
complicated is if you think it works for
you, you become sort of, I don't know,
psychologically attached to them.
>> Mhm.
>> And you think, if I quit this, am I
going to spiral? Am I going to feel bad
again? And we know that the placebo
effect is a huge part of the picture
with these medications. And I think it's
the same when you go off. They call it
the nocebo effect, which is if you think
it's essential to you, you may be just
afraid of stopping, afraid of finding
out what that's like. And that could
sort of contribute to your feeling bad.
>> Mhm.
>> Michael, in your case, what did you
conclude about stopping?
>> Me, I
don't know that I've
ever gotten far enough along in the
conversation with myself to stop. I just
know that
on the
occasions when I have failed to reliably
take Lexapro, I have experienced some
really crippling headaches, which I
needed a doctor to tell me were from not
taking my Lexapro reliably, but there
was no deeper conversation. There was
no, is it time to think about whether
you should be tapering? How long have
you been on it? It was just an accepted
fact in my conversation with the doctor
that I was on it, and then I'd probably
still be on it for as long as I'm going
to be on it.
>> And do you think that that conversation
should have happened
when you first went on?
>> I wonder now. But now I'm asking myself
the question of are we all infantilizing
ourselves in the face of medicine?
Should I be asking this question myself?
Why should I be waiting for a doctor to
ask it? It's getting a little
existential now.
>> Mhm. I mean, some people have multiple
remissions, and what I hear from
physicians is if you've had like three
episodes of depression, then you
probably are going to take an SSRI for
indefinitely as a maintenance treatment.
And if it's fewer than three, then no,
then you should try to get off if you
want. But I don't think there's a lot of
energy around having that conversation.
>> Right.
I mean, we're talking about
de-prescription here because that's the
conversation that RFK Jr. and those
around him want us to be having,
but there's also a possibility
that people are going to hear this
conversation,
and instead of just de-prescription,
they're going to hear, maybe I shouldn't
ever get a prescription. And I wonder if
that's a risk that RFK Jr. and the
medical experts who are now joining him
in this conversation
are thinking about.
>> I mean, because I cover psychiatry and
mental health, I have been doing
interviews all over the country about
people's use of this kind of medication
and I'll tell you that like they're
reaching parts of society that just
wouldn't have gotten any kind of mental
health care in the past. So, I remember
talking to
I think he was an auto mechanic and I I
was doing interviews in a school parking
lot and he said, you know, like my
father was an angry drunk and because I
take an antidepressant, I know I'm not
going to go that way.
>> Mhm.
>> And there groups within our society that
are only now for the first time getting
access to a treatment for depression or
a treatment for anxiety.
I mean, I think if you look at the
numbers, white people take
antidepressants at a rate that is twice
as high as any other racial category and
like five times as high as Asian people.
So, there's just a huge discrepancy.
Some groups take these a lot, some
groups really don't have much access.
>> In other words, because of the
demographics of takes these mental
health drugs,
there are plenty of people who perhaps
could benefit from them who have never
been introduced to them or are just
starting culturally to accept the idea
that they can and will be on them and
the over prescription de-prescription
conversation isn't necessarily the right
one for them to be having right now.
>> Yeah, I think that's right.
>> [music]
>> I mean, it may be that there is no one
message that is appropriate for our
[music] entire society. So, I think RFK
Jr., [music] the secretary, has to be
very careful about encouraging this
conversation about
>> [music]
>> stopping medication when it's
appropriate without driving people away
from the idea of treatment completely.
[music]
>> Right, it's one thing to have a
conversation about de-prescription. It's
another [music] to intentionally or not
stigmatize ever getting a prescription.
>> Yeah, I think both of these
conversations need to happen. How to
access treatment [music] that people
really desperately need, and also
how much is enough and how to stop.
>> Well, Ellen, thank you very much. We
appreciate it.
>> Thank [music] you.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need
>> [music]
>> to know today.
As a new round of peace talks started
between the US and Iran on Sunday,
the conflict between Israel and
Hezbollah in Lebanon threw a wrench into
the negotiations.
>> [music]
>> Fighting between Israel and Hezbollah
prompted Iran to claim it was once again
closing the Strait of Hormuz, a threat
US officials [music] said had not been
carried out.
Iran has demanded that fighting in
Lebanon end immediately,
>> [music]
>> but ceasefires there have been declared,
broken, and reinstated several times
over the past few weeks. [music]
And
problems with President Trump's $14
million renovation of the Lincoln
Memorial reflecting pool, timed for
America's 250th birthday next month,
have become so severe that [music] Trump
said he will have to partially drain the
pool for repairs.
Over the past few days, the pool's new
coat of [music] dark blue paint, applied
by a company that has never before
worked for the federal government, has
begun [music] to visibly peel, and green
algae has spread across the pool,
likely because the renovation project
does not fix the pool's malfunctioning
filtration [music] system.
Today's episode was [music] produced by
Alex Stern, Jack D'Isidoro, Claire
Tennis and Stella Tan.
With help [music] from Anna Foley and
Olivia Natt.
It was edited by M J Davis Lynn with
help from Brendan Klinkenberg and
contains music by Pat McCusker and Dan
Powell. This episode [music] was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.
>> [music]